Resources on Dylan
==================

World Wide Web pages for this book and its examples
---------------------------------------------------

Both Addison-Wesley and Harlequin maintain Web pages about this book,
including the source code of the program examples, and excerpts from the
book. The address of the Addison-Wesley Web page for computer science
and engineering is

http://www.aw.com/cseng/

The address of Harlequin’s Web page is

http://www.harlequin.com/

Newsgroup
---------

The name of the newsgroup about Dylan is

comp.lang.dylan

The newsgroup is also available as an Internet mailing list. To
subscribe to the *info-dylan* mailing list, send a message to
``majordomo@harlequin.co.uk``. In the body of the message, include
the words ``subscribe info-dylan``.

You may subscribe to the Dylan announcements mailing list by
including the words ``subscribe announce-dylan``.

Harlequin
---------

Harlequin’s initial Dylan product is a Dylan implementation for Windows
95 and Windows/NT. Harlequin will offer Dylan implementations on the
three major platforms: Windows, UNIX, and the Macintosh. Harlequin will
provide a native Dylan development environment and technical support.

Harlequin’s Dylan Web site contains a great deal of useful information
about Dylan, including the FAQ, *The Dylan Reference Manual*, and
pointers to public-domain implementations of Dylan and to the *comp.lang.dylan*
newsgroup. The address of Harlequin’s Dylan Web page is

http://www.harlequin.com/full/dylan.html

Harlequin’s main Web site is located at

http://www.harlequin.com/

Harlequin’s main telephone numbers are

United States: 617-374-2400

United Kingdom: 44 (0) 1223 873800

Harlequin’s main addresses are

Harlequin Incorporated

One Cambridge Center

Cambridge, MA 02142 USA

Harlequin Limited

Barrington Hall

Barrington

Cambridge

United Kingdom

CB2 5RG

Carnegie Mellon University
--------------------------

Carnegie Mellon provides a public-domain implementation called *Mindy*,
which stands for “Mindy Is Not Dylan Yet.” Mindy is an experimental
byte-compiler and interpreter written in C. Mindy implementations are
available for UNIX, WindowsNT, OS/2, and the Macintosh (both 68000 and
PowerPC).

Carnegie Mellon’s Gwydion and Dylan Web site contains a great deal of
useful information about Dylan, including the FAQ, *The Dylan Reference
Manual*, the *comp.lang.dylan* newsgroup, and releases of Mindy.
Carnegie Mellon’s Web site about Gwydion and Dylan is located at

http://legend.gwydion.cs.cmu.edu/gwydion/

The address of Carnegie Mellon’s Gwydion and Dylan ftp site is

ftp://legend.gwydion.cs.cmu.edu/usr/gwydion/ftp/

Carnegie Mellon’s main Web site is located at

http://www.cmu.edu/

Carnegie Mellon’s electronic mail address for Gwydion is

gwydion-group@cs.cmu.edu

Apple Computer, Inc.
--------------------

Apple Computer sells the Apple Dylan Technology Release. That release is
a low-cost product, which provides the opportunity for programmers to
become familiar with the Dylan language and the Apple Dylan development
environment. The software is unfinished, and will not be supported or
updated by Apple.

Apple’s Dylan Web page contains much useful information about Dylan,
including the FAQ, *The Dylan Reference Manual*, mail archives,
newsgroup archives, articles about Dylan, and pointers to public-domain
implementations of Dylan:

http://www.cambridge.apple.com/

Apple’s Dylan ftp site is located at

ftp://ftp.cambridge.apple.com/pub/dylan/

You can order the Apple Dylan Technology Release from the Apple
Developer Catalog Online, located at

http://www.devcatalog.apple.com/

The telephone numbers for the Apple Developer Catalog Online are

U.S.: 1-800-282-2732

Canada: 1-800-637-0029

International: 1-716-871-6555

Apple’s main Web site is located at

http://www.apple.com/

Apple’s main address is

Apple Computer, Inc.

1 Infinite Loop

Cupertino, CA 95014

Digitool, Inc.
--------------

Digitool ported the Apple Dylan Technology Release to run natively on
the Power Macintosh. You can obtain this version from Apple Computer
directly.

Digitool’s main Web site is located at

http://www.digitool.com/

Digitool’s telephone number is

617-441-5000

Digitool’s address is

Digitool, Inc.

One Main Street — 7th Floor

Cambridge, MA 02142

Marlais
-------

Marlais is an experimental Dylan interpreter in the public domain as
“copylefted” software. Marlais is available on UNIX, the Macintosh, and
Windows. It was originally developed by Brent Benson of Harris Computer
Systems, and new versions were developed by Joseph N. Wilson, at the
University of Florida. Patrick Beard developed the Macintosh
implementation of Marlais.

The address of the Web site for Marlais is

http://www.cise.ufl.edu:/~jnw/Marlais/

The Web site for the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Department of the University of Florida is located at

http://www.cise.ufl.edu/

The telephone number of the department where Marlais is being developed
is

904-392-1200

The address of the department where Marlais is being developed is

Computer & Information Science & Engineering

Room E301 CSE Building

PO Box 116120

University of Florida

Gainesville, FL 32611-6120
